Multiarch support
=================

Flatpak has multiarch/multilib support, but it's not enabled by default and
require some additional steps to enable it. This section covers enabling
multiarch/multilib in your application bundle.

Running 32-bit programs
-----------------------

In order to set up the run time environment for 32-bit executables, first you'll
need to allow it in ``finish-args``:

.. code-block:: yaml

  finish-args:
    - --allow=multiarch

This is enough for static binaries, but most real-world GNU/Linux programs are
linked dynamically. Those need some shared libraries to work.

Freedesktop.org and GNOME SDKs both provide a special flatpak extension with a
set of libraries for corresponding architecture. This extension can be attached
to an app of different architecture. In order to enable the extension for your
app, define an extension point for it in the app manifest:

.. code-block:: yaml

  add-extensions:
    org.freedesktop.Platform.Compat.i386:
      directory: lib/i386-linux-gnu
      version: '21.08'

    # This is not strictly required, but needed for debugging 32-bit programs
    org.freedesktop.Platform.Compat.i386.Debug:
      directory: lib/debug/lib/i386-linux-gnu
      version: '21.08'
      no-autodownload: true

For GNOME runtime, use ``org.gnome.Platform.Compat.i386`` instead.

Note that this extension ``version`` must match the ``runtime-version`` of the
application.

If the 32-bit programs make use of GPU acceleration, or have some graphical UI
in general, you'll also need 32-bit GL drivers. Add an extension point for it:

.. code-block:: yaml

  add-extensions:
    org.freedesktop.Platform.GL32:
      directory: lib/i386-linux-gnu/GL
      version: '1.4'
      versions: 21.08;1.4
      subdirectories: true
      no-autodownload: true
      autodelete: false
      add-ld-path: lib
      merge-dirs: vulkan/icd.d;glvnd/egl_vendor.d;OpenCL/vendors;lib/dri;lib/d3d;vulkan/explicit_layer.d;vulkan/implicit_layer.d
      download-if: active-gl-driver
      enable-if: active-gl-driver

Note that the ``versions`` property here must contain both ``1.4`` and the same
value as in ``runtime-version``.

Make sure to create directories where the extensions will be mounted (the mount
points are specified in ``directory`` properties and are relative to the app
bundle mount point, i.e. to ``/app/``). This can be done at stage of the build.

Finally, you need to make the dynamic library loader know the paths to 32-bit
libraries. In order to do this, you can install a ``/app/etc/ld.so.conf`` file
with contents like this:

.. code-block:: text

  /app/lib32
  /app/lib/i386-linux-gnu

Here ``/app/lib32`` is the directory where you install additional 32-bit
libraries, if any.

You can combine the above two steps in a special module, e.g.

.. code-block:: yaml

  modules:
    - name: bundle-setup
      buildsystem: simple
      build-commands:
        - mkdir -p /app/lib/i386-linux-gnu
        - mkdir -p /app/lib/debug/lib/i386-linux-gnu
        - mkdir -p /app/lib/i386-linux-gnu/GL
        - install -Dm644 ld.so.conf /app/etc/ld.so.conf
      sources:
        - type: inline
          dest-filename: ld.so.conf
          contents: |
            /app/lib32
            /app/lib/i386-linux-gnu


Building 32-bit modules
-----------------------

The section above describes how to run 32-bit programs that are already built.
This section will describe the process of building 32-bit components yourself to
ship them with the application. It assumes that you are already familiar with
building (single-arch) flatpaks. If not, please refer to :doc:`flatpak-builder`
guide first.

First of all, you'll need to enable some SDK extensions at build time:

.. code-block:: yaml

  sdk-extensions:
    - org.freedesktop.Sdk.Compat.i386
    - org.freedesktop.Sdk.Extension.toolchain-i386

The first one is the 32-bit portion of the SDK, containing 32-bit libraries and
development files.

The second one is a cross-compiler. Usually ``gcc -m32`` is used for multilib
builds, but the flatpak SDK comes with gcc without multilib support. Thus, you
will need a cross-compiler for building x86 on x86_64 just as you would need it
for any foreign architecture like aarch64.

In order to build a 32-bit module, some global build options needs to be
overridden. Examples here assume that 32-bit libraries are installed in
``/app/lib32`` directory:

.. code-block:: yaml

  modules:
    - name: some-lib-32bit
      build-options: &compat-i386-build-options
        # Make sure 32-bit dependencies are first on pkg-config search path
        prepend-pkg-config-path: /app/lib32/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/i386-linux-gnu/pkgconfig
        # Add /app/lib32 to linker search path for modules without pkg-config
        ldflags: -L/app/lib32
        # Add the cross-compiler to PATH
        prepend-path: /usr/lib/sdk/toolchain-i386/bin
        # Tell the build systems to use the cross-compiler for compilation
        env:
          CC: i686-unknown-linux-gnu-gcc
          CXX: i686-unknown-linux-gnu-g++
        # Tell the build systems to install libraries to /app/lib32
        libdir: /app/lib32

These ``build-options`` need to be set for each 32-bit module. If your app
manifest is in YAML format, the YAML anchors can come in handy and save you from
copy-pasting the same snippet. You can define the 32-bit ``build-options``
object somewhere in the manifest, add an anchor to it, and then point each
32-bit modules' ``build-options`` to that anchor:

.. code-block:: yaml

  x-compat-i386-build-options: &compat-i386-build-options
    prepend-pkg-config-path: /app/lib32/pkgconfig:/usr/lib/i386-linux-gnu/pkgconfig
    ldflags: -L/app/lib32
    prepend-path: /usr/lib/sdk/toolchain-i386/bin
    env:
      CC: i686-unknown-linux-gnu-gcc
      CXX: i686-unknown-linux-gnu-g++
    libdir: /app/lib32

  modules:
    - name: some-lib-32bit
      build-options: *compat-i386-build-options

    - name: some-other-lib-32bit
      build-options: *compat-i386-build-options

Of course, in order to actually use 32-bit modules you've build, you'll also
need all the same setup from the previous section.
